In this report the Commission draws a distinction between what we call ‘static
data’ and ‘fluid data’. Static data is that which is collected, recorded and stored by
institutions and traditionally includes student records, staff data, financial data and
estates data. Fluid data is the data that is generated through the increasingly digital
way a student interacts with their university, such as swipe card data from accesscontrolled
campus buildings, log-ins to the virtual learning environment (VLE) and
e-books or online journal downloads. 



• Increasing retention
• Providing better feedback to students
• Capturing attendance data
• Enhancing teaching and learning

improve student support / performance at their institution.

There are a number of issues and challenges facing the sector in introducing learning
analytics. Firstly, we considered the ethical issues related to the use of student data
by institutions, particularly in terms of student consent and privacy. We recommend
that institutions put in place clear ethical policies and codes of practices to govern
the use of student data in analytics and other digital systems. This not only gives
universities a guide to ensure their analytics systems are appropriate and legal, but
also increases student acceptance of their own data being used in analytics. These
policies should, at a minimum, address student privacy, security of data and consent,
and should be updated whenever there is a change to the data used or the analytics
undertaken. The Commission felt it was crucial that institutions sought informed
consent from their students.
5
Executive Summary
Another issue the Commission heard in the course of the inquiry was the concern that
students might ‘game the system’, manipulating analytics in order to achieve false
positive results and reducing the overall performance of the system. This is a concern
with many systems of measurement where the underlying metrics are known (such
as the NSS). In learning analytics, the Commission believes the best way to prevent
unnecessary gaming is to remove the incentives to do so. This approach requires
creating formative analytics systems rather than summative, which means using
analytics to encourage students to reflect on how they are learning, or to initiate a
conversation between a tutor and a student, instead of using the system to assess the
student’s performance or ability.
The Commission also looked at capacity and resourcing. We found that most
institutions do not have effective data management systems in place, and data is
currently held in silos and is inconsistent with other institutional data. Given how
critical good data management is to introducing analytics (and to performing a
range of other jobs in a data-driven environment), we recommend that institutions
should immediately review their internal data management approaches and put in
place plans to ensure that their data is clean, accurate, consistent, secure and fit for
purpose.
Finally, we found that the senior leadership was crucial in encouraging the take-up
of new practices such as analytics. This requires a strong strategic vision from
management, who need to drive forward a culture shift within their institutions
where data is seen as integral to all aspects of the university. In particular, staff
data capability needs to be increased. We recommend that staff be empowered to
perform their roles well in a digital, data-driven world, and should be provided
with appropriate training and support to improve their digital capability and data
management skills.
In Part Three, the Commission considers some of the data-related trends that will
drive development in higher education. We believe that learning at university will
become increasingly digital, with more course material taking place through VLEs,
augmented reality learning environments and increasing use of portable devices such
as wearable technology. All of these systems will add to the volume of data that is
being generated about a student’s learning, which can be used in analytics to provide
a more complete and powerful portrait of the student.
We also expect to see widespread adoption of analytics in the next three to five
years, as well as increasingly advanced analytics systems in use in institutions. These
will include predictive analytics, adaptive learning systems and analytics designed
specifically for students, presented in student-facing apps. We may also see the
development of sophisticated course advisor systems, which use data about previous
students’ study choices to advise current students on what modules to choose and
what extracurricular activities or internships they should consider. All of these will be
powerful assets for students, giving them access to instant, personalised information
and resources that fit into their daily lives.
6
Executive Summary
The open data agenda, a growing area in government and society generally, is
having less traction in HE. While we have seen the rise of MOOCs and a push from
government for more high-quality information, the more marketised HE landscape
is making institutions more reluctant to share data. The Commission believes that as
institutions use more data, they should be encouraged to be transparent about how
they use their data and to continue to publish high-quality information about their
courses, campuses, destination data and fees. Accordingly institutions should remain
subject to the requirements of the FOI Act, and any new providers who enter into the
HE market and receive public funds should be brought within its scope.
If all institutions adopt the good data management practices and follow our learning
analytics principles, the sector will be in possession of a powerful dataset that may
be especially relevant for the TEF. As learning analytics data provides a snapshot of
how engaged students are and how well they are performing, this could be considered
a useful indication of where excellent teaching is taking place. The Commission
recommends that institutions should be encouraged to use the information from
learning analytics systems to identify and foster excellent teaching within their
institutions, and to consider using this information in their submissions to the TEF.
